hello
everyone welcome to wordpress
accessibility day
my name is ally nimmins i'm your host
for the next few sessions
we're about to get started with the very
first session of the event
so how do i know if my wordpress website
is accessible with graham armfield
so if that's a question that you've
asked yourself before you are in the
right place
please feel free to add your questions
directly into the youtube chat
feed and we will answer those together
at the end of the presentation
a little bit about graham graham is a
web accessibility consultant with his
own company coolfields consulting
he works with organizations to help them
improve the accessibility of their
websites
testing the functionality or testing the
websites for accessibility
and advising the designers and
developers on how to fix issues found
he has written detailed training courses
on accessibility
for developers which he presents on a
regular basis
he's also a wordpress developer and has
built many accessible wordpress websites
for clients both large and small
he has contributed to the make wordpress
accessible team and
spoken on accessibility to many word
camps and other wordpress meetups
today he's going to be answering the
question so how do i know
if my website wordpress website is
accessible
graham let's get started okay
thanks a lot for the introduction ali
i'm going to share my screen now
uh can i share my screen let's see
um yeah there we go
am i yes i am screen sharing
thank you for the introduction ali
my name is graham anfield i'm just going
to make sure i have the right screens
visible
on my monitor here so that i know what
i'm doing
uh yeah thank you for the introduction
um
my talk i'm honored to be
doing the first presentation at the
first ever wordpress
accessibility day and my presentation as
ali has said is called so how do i know
if my wordpress website is accessible
okay let's get going now a bit about me
well i don't really need to introduce
myself anymore because ali's already
done it
yes i've been doing accessibility
uh for nearly 20 years now starting
working
on it for a large financial 20 years ago
and but now i work on my own my company
is called coolfields consulting
and yeah it's all i do now accessibility
i look at how websites are doing on an
accessibility scale
and i help developers understand the
problems
and fix the problems as well so
there we go and i yeah i run training
courses on a regular basis for
developers too
i've built a few accessible wordpress
sites over the years
and i can help people build accessible
themes
right moving on since mine's the first
talk uh
some of us uh well you know everyone
probably knows what accessibility is but
i want to talk a bit about why it's
important
now it affects more people than you
think something like 20 to 25 percent of
the population
have some kind of different perhaps
access
needs when it comes to websites this
might of course be caused by
blindness poor vision color blindness
dyslexia adhd autism deafness
but also it's like my people like my
parents they're just getting old they're
in their 80s now they use the web
every day they need things to be simple
and they need things to be clear
this picture that i'm showing you some
of you may recognize it if you've been
to london
it's the hill that leads up on the
northern side the river thames
up to uh some paul's cathedral here
okay um it crosses a couple of streets
but it's just a
it goes up the hill and they've got
steps here for everyone to use
but they've also put this ramp in when
they built this uh it's connected with
the millennium
uh so a few 20 years ago now
uh they put this ramp in here presumably
for wheelchair users
and for um
you know for people we're you know with
push shares buggies or whatever
and but if you stand here and look at
people using this slope you can see that
most people
actually use the ramp rather than using
the stairs because perhaps they find it
easier
now it's one of the things about uh
doing accessibility
is that without realizing that you're
doing it accessibility doing things
right
can help everybody not just the people
the specific people you're targeting
okay so what i'm going to cover now i'm
familiar
with the workout guidelines you may have
heard of them
officially official title the web
content accessibility guidelines
version 2.1 published by the web
accessibility initiative of the world
wide web consortium that's quite a
mouthful
and there's a link there if you want to
find out more about them
now these are a great resource for web
accessibility there's lots of techniques
in there things to do to test it
but especially if you're new to the game
uh
it can be very hard to interpret what's
going on here i still find bits that i'm
not really sure about as well when i say
i've been doing it for about 20 years
now
so i thought okay what could be useful
would be a simple yes no checklist for
people
and so that's what this presentation is
it's 15 questions 15 simple questions
that you can ask about your own site
whether it whether it's your site
or a site you're building for a client
or just any site that you're looking at
things that you can check quite easily
about your site
and with free tools i'll mention some of
these and i've got some links at the end
on how to get hold of those as well okay
but in the short time that i've got i
don't want to talk for hours i've got
half an hour to talk
and then we can do some questions i can
only cover some uh
common accessibility issues but the ones
i cover are ones that i commonly find
when i'm reviewing websites
and um the uh
also they're sometimes the most
important ones as well
so they're not i'm not covering
everything but if you can answer these
questions correctly
your site is going to be a lot more
accessible than many websites out there
sadly there are a lot of inaccessible
websites and the situation doesn't
appear
to be getting any better
firstly we're going to talk about
keyboard interaction and before we get
onto the actual questions itself
why keyboard accessibility is important
well some people can't use a mouse
trackpad or touch commands because
they perhaps have a motor impairment
that affects their
their hands or their arms okay so
they're going to potentially be relying
on keyboards to use their machines
some people have very severe motor
impairments and they'll be using switch
devices
and these hook into the keyboard api
within
their laptop or their desktop machine
okay
so it's really important that we get
keyboard accessibility right
also if i'm using a screen reader on my
laptop here or a desktop machine
i'm going to be actually interacting
with it using a series of keystrokes
so let's get on to the questions the
first one
can i easily see where keyboard focus is
and the second one can i easily access
all parts of the site using just the
keyboard
okay the first one about keyboard focus
if you're
a mouse user a touch user or
you're using your this uh you know a
track pad
underneath your keyboard you're probably
not going to have necessarily any
concept of what a keyboard focus is but
if i'm a keyboard user who's sighted
i will be relying on it all the time so
if i i'm going to be tabbing around a
page to the links and other
things that get focused i want to know
where keyboard focus is because it can
very easily get lost
so let's have a look at this site
admittedly you're not a wordpress site
gov.uk is a well-known site in the uk
and it contains a vast resource for
everyone
information about government local
government
finance tax disabled people education
and what have you and yes they've got a
lot of stuff on coronavirus at the
moment
and it's one prize is this design um if
i hover over these links i hope you can
see my pound
uh my mouse pointer here but if i'm
hovering over one of those links at the
moment
they do change color but it's quite a
subtle change but then
with my mouse pointer i know where i am
okay
so if i'm a sighted keyboard user
i'm going to be really thankful for here
very clear indication of where keyboard
focuses this
this yellow background and black links
and that's
common across the entire site i can see
at a glance where focus
is that's good okay
actually this is a wordpress website
hassle inclusion it's a company i do a
lot of work with
and here there is clear keyboard focus
everywhere on the site
and in terms of getting to all the site
this is good too because this navigation
across the top
i've got sub menus hanging off some of
these elements and i can get to them
with the keyboard as well so i can
keyboard users
are not effectively locked out from the
site
as they might be with this site this is
odeon in
in the uk this is a chain of cinemas and
this is what happens
when i hover over this link here i get
this grey hover indication
and this sub menu appears so
that's going you know i can choose from
these
things on here that's fine but for
keyboard users the situation's not so
great because if i'm tabbing through
these navigation links
i can i can't see at all where focus is
and also when i get when i actually get
onto the what's on
link there i'm not seeing the sub menu
at all
and so it can now be really difficult
for keyboard users
and that could include screen reader
users here as well
it can actually be really hard to find
all the bits of the site
so that's something to avoid
let's have a look at a couple more
questions and you need to answer yes to
both of these ones as well
does the keyboard tab order make sense
and can i easily access all the
functionality of the site
using the keyboard only the first one
tab order
that's an easy one to check assuming
that you've got a visible focus
or you can just press the tab key and
what you want is the table to follow
kind of the way
that the pages are laid out on the
website that you're testing whether it's
yours or somebody else's
okay so you just need the tab order to
actually
follow the content really ideally and
not jump around
randomly but looking at the second one
can i easily
access all functionality with the
keyboard only let's have a look at this
this is a wordpress site
and i it uses a lightbox plug-in of
which there are a number available
here i've got these thumbnail images in
the content
and if i click on those images or tab to
them and press the
enter key it actually shows me a full
size version of the image
okay i'm sure you're all familiar with
the concept
the problem is for keyboard users is
that when i actually action that light
box yeah sure i've got this nice
picture of the new of the uh skyline in
newcastle pontine
as the sun is setting that's great but
keyboard focus has remained on the page
below so now i can't see what's going on
if i press the tab key i'm actually
moving through the underlying page
and i can't get to the controls here i
can't close
the lightbox window i can't get to these
buttons along the bottom which take me
to the next or the previous image on the
page
so that's not great okay
jetpack this is a wordpress website um
and generally not bad from an
accessibility perspective
they've got this language selector here
so if i tab to the language selector
and press enter i can see
the all the different options here of
the different languages that i can
have this website presented to me in the
problem here is once again
the keyboard focus actually is still on
the underlying page and so it's now
impossible
for keyboard users and screen reader
users to actually access
and change the languages so that's a bit
of a no-no
okay moving away from talking about
keyboard accessibility
let's talk about links in your pages
okay the first one are your links
obviously links
do they look clickable can you tell them
apart from other things on the page
you need to answer yes to that okay
this is a paragraph of text about exeter
and devon
uh on a wordpress website and this
particular theme
which sadly quite a lot of themes do
they have chosen that by default to
remove the underline from all these
links
that are in this uh paragraph of content
there's a lot of links in there
you may or may not be able to see them
they're marked out in green text
assuming you're not colorblind okay so
it's a lot easier even if you're if you
even if you have good vision it's still
quite easy it's a lot easier to see
where these links are
if here i've overridden the design to
actually put the underlines back in
now i know some people don't like these
hard underlines so you can use
other ways of doing it you can use a
gradient or
a the border bottom border or something
like that
but please use this the underlines are
like a convention on the web that to
show where the links
are it's been around since the dawn of
the web really
um the other issue here with the lock
having a few links in here with
a green with dark grey text is that
people
who are color blind or poor vision just
may not be able to see them
at all because they may just look very
similar to the actual playing content
we can do better than that okay so the
next question
and you need to answer yes to this one
as well uh
do all the links provide enough
information to state where they need to
does it tell you where the link is going
to take you
okay here from a wordpress site
are a couple of links now cited users
are going to see immediately what's
going on here
the first one find out more about my
plugin
and second click here to
read more about our terms and conditions
but these links
whilst for sighted users i can see
what's going on
for screen reader users the situation
may not be
as easy because an nvda
is a screen reader that you can download
for windows machines it's free to
download so it's used by a lot of people
it's a very good screen reader
okay and it has these dialog boxes which
you can bring up called the elements
list
you can see it at the top there and the
links
that we just looked at are indicated
here now what this means is that screen
reader users who are using this
functionality and other screen readers
carry this functionality as well
they're not going to get any context for
these links these links presumably each
one will take you to a different page
but as far as the screen reader user is
concerned they're just saying click here
so that's not really that informative
the other thing to note about the dialog
boxes like this
is that i can actually if i've i can
choose one of these links and actually
follow it directly from here
so people are going to be interacting
with this elements list
rather than your pages directly if
they're using a screen reader
now with a small change to the content
the situation can be so much better
here i've changed it to remove the click
here's and to put out
much more informative links and you'll
see here in the elements list
that the screen reader is now screener
user is now going to understand
exactly where it is that these links are
going to take them
so that's good and which version is
easier well
the one on the right hand side so test
your links to make sure that they're
meaningful
we want to avoid this now if you've got
uh you've got a blog on your wordpress
website
you'll have a blog index page i'm sure
that you'll list your last 10 or 12 or
however many
blog posts and some themes could put a
lot of links into that page
and here once again i've got the
elements list
from my screen reader nvda in this case
and there's a lot of links the first one
is this is actually the featured image
for this post
and if i click on it it will take me to
the blog post
but the the link text here is
effectively koala bear i'll talk a bit
about featured images in a moment
the actual blog post is called ist
southern area so that link
is informative i've also got links to
the date i published it on
if i'm not you know i'm not publishing
five blog posts a day so it's not
necessarily that vital
to have a link to the to that particular
date
leave a comment presumably that's going
to take me to the bottom of the comments
uh
on the comments section read more okay
now if i've got
10 or 12 links to blogs on this page
i'm going to have multiple links that
say read more
not very informative i've got the
categories and
the tags so there's a lot going on here
do these links always make sense i don't
know you you it's your decision really
and this theme does a lot not all themes
do as much as that and if you're
building a theme for a client
think about which ones are relevant here
okay moving away from links
let's talk about images and this first
one can you answer yes to this
do all the images on your pages have
appropriate alternate text
if i can't see the images because i'm
blind i will rely
on alternate text using the alt
attribute
and yeah in wordpress it's fairly easy
to get this right if you know what
you're doing
this is another from a wordpress site
here i'm using the wave browser
extension
and i'll show you a link on where you
can get that from and
it shows me what the alternate text is
for all the images on the page
here extra keysight once again exeter is
a
city in devon in south west england
i've got a green icon here because it
says it's telling you know it's saying
yeah
you've got alternate text set that's
great you get a red icon if it's not set
properly
okay now the appropriate alternate text
may mean an empty alt attribute
and if we have a look at how you add
images in the wordpress classic editor
here is how you set the alternate text
and um if you notice underneath here it
says leave empty if the image is purely
decorative
okay so decorative images want to end up
with an empty or attribute
and this is a convention for screen
readers
so that a screen reader comes across an
image that's got an empty alt attribute
then it just ignores it it knows it's
it's not really anything meaningful
there
just a note if you're doing this make
sure
if you set a caption it's a good idea to
set the alternate text as well
because not all screen readers will
actually link the two together even
though
they're quite close on pages
and this is what it looks like if you're
doing it in gutenberg
same sort of box okay
now where you've got uh images that are
part of links
it's best to have the link destination
as the alternate text for that image
and in this theme that i've used for my
music site that is the case because if i
this is the featured image for this post
and this is on my
my blog index page if i click on the
image it will take me to
the the blog post called recording don't
let go
and you can have a look if you look
under the bonnet at the code
here's the link that takes me to the
blog page and the blog post
and the alternate text in the cases like
this where the image is part of the link
what the alt attribute is set to becomes
part of the link text
so that's good this one's not so good i
showed you this one a little earlier
here's looking at the elements list in
nvda screen reader the actual clicking
on that image takes me to the blog post
which is called istc southern area okay
but the alternate text for that image is
koala bear
so a screen reader user might think that
there's a it takes me to
a story about koala bears but it doesn't
so if you if you're using a theme
hopefully it's one
that doesn't do that okay
um videos now
this is an obvious one isn't it do all
your videos have captions
this is me doing this presentation it's
not the first time i've done it
to a group of developers some time ago
and it's on youtube
so the captions are shown here i've made
sure that the captions are all up
up to date up right and everything up
straight um
now it's obviously deaf people and
people with heart who are hard of
hearing
who rely on captions but actually
surveys have found out that many other
people
you can use captions with videos as well
sometimes people with cognitive
impairments
uh dyslexia and other cognitive
impairments will also use the captions
as well because it helps underline
what's being said others like if you're
watching videos
on facebook or something or on a crowded
train or in
an office when you should be doing
something else you might be using the
captions instead of having it
blaring out okay so make sure your
videos have captions
okay a few questions around what i like
to call
is sign posting content
and the first one you need to answer yes
to this are your page titles unique and
meaningful
now actually in wordpress it's pretty
easy to get this right because pretty
much
every theme that i've ever come across
will take whatever the page title or the
blog title is
and actually use that as the actual
title element in the page which is what
you see
in this tab at the top of your browser
okay so this is the one from
wordpress.org and here's one from my own
music site
okay to found my way album and if you
look here
it sets the title elements to found my
way album grandma for music
right the importance here is that when a
screen reader user arrives
at a page for the first time the page
title
is the first thing that they will hear
it helps people to know
that they're in the right place okay
sometimes i find websites that just have
the same page title right across the
board so that doesn't mean anything
really
okay the next question and yes you need
to answer yes to this one
do your pages have appropriate headings
and subheadings
now you headings used properly and
subheadings used properly help
everybody and here are on my callfield
site
i've got some headings here and i'm
using the wave browser extension here
and not only does it show me that
they're headings but it's also
highlighting the heading level as well
because the heading levels are important
because they help people get an idea of
what are sections and subsections within
your pages
and how screen reader users do that is
they'll use once again the elements list
here
except now instead of looking at links
i'm looking at headings
notice that nvda is exposing the heading
hierarchy
and when you go through this list the
screen reader will read out to you what
what the heading is and what level it is
so people can try and build up a mental
picture of the page
from the levels of the headings so
make sure that yours are set
appropriately
the important thing to note here is that
headings in nvda
and other screen readers have
functionality similar to this
you can use these things to jump around
the page okay
so if i find a heading i'm interested in
press the enter key it takes me straight
to it
okay talking about people jumping around
pages
are all your landmarks being used
correctly now
when i've done other presentations to
developers actually i'm finding
that not very many developers know what
landmarks are
but actually many people do use them
without realizing
landmarks they're predefined areas
within a page this is a
typical but not it it's not the only
design for a site
i've got a banner at the top some
navigation my main content and a footer
and a sidebar here
okay that's sort of an old older style
layout for a page okay now um
screen reader users may use these
landmarks to jump around
to find a bit they're interested in the
key thing here is when i arrive in a new
page
it's often the main content of that page
is the bit that i'm most interested in
and so i want to try and find the main
content landmark
okay if and then when i've read that
then i might want to find the navigation
to go and find something else on your
site
now most developers don't use landmarks
on purpose but they probably are using
the html5
elements like these okay
and if you use them properly they set up
landmarks
in an appropriate way so make sure you
are using them properly
because screen reader users will be
using them
okay so how do you test for the
landmarks well there's a browser
extension for that too
it's one that's called landmark
navigation via keyboard or pop-up
it's available for firefox as you can
see here we've got firefox in the
screenshot
or it's also on chrome as well and
if you check this box here show all
landmarks it puts these outlines
on your page so you can see where all
the landmarks on your pages
are the key thing that's missing from
this page
because this theme this wordpress theme
didn't put them there
there is no main landmark so there's no
way
using landmarks of a screen reader user
jumping straight to the main content of
the page
okay there are might be other ways of
doing it but if i'm a landmarks user
then it's not easy for me to get there
okay next one looking at text
can i resize the text in a page without
breaking the layout obviously you need
to answer yes to that
okay here's some a list of links a
normal size took this screenshot a few
years ago
but it illustrates the problem i find
well
i find on some websites so here's normal
text size and this is what it looks like
when i make the text bigger
it's important to realize that zooming
and text resizing
are not the same thing in browsers
zooming is the default option
but people do use text resizing if they
got poor vision
to make things bigger and you know
people do do that
so it's important that you test your
site to make sure that it can cope with
it
this didn't and it's quite easy to find
other examples across the internet
where resizing kind of breaks sites
badly
hopefully it doesn't break your site
next one are you using fully justified
text
and i would hope that you're not really
so here's a paragraph
of text left aligned and this is what it
looks like when it's fully justified
what the browser is doing here is it's
stretching the gaps between the words so
for example on this line here cathedral
founded in the mid 11th century
it's had to stretch the words quite a
long way apart much further
than on other lines now this actually
creates
a cognitive load for everybody
but especially so for some dyslexic
people there's around eight to ten
percent of the population could be
affected by this
you get this rivers of white space
effect i have a friend who's
severely dyslexic and she couldn't read
this paragraph
if it's fully justified um she just
could not read it at all
the spaces just tend to take over
okay a question around forms in my forms
do all the form fields have an
accompanying label
they need to for screen reader users
really because the way that screen
readers work when i arrive at this
input field here i need to find out what
it's for so
the properly marked up labels are vital
here for screen reader users
this is i'm using the wave add-on here
and
it's showing me that all these labels
are properly marked up
so that a screen reader users should
have no problems using this form
okay however on this website
wordpress website using the contact form
with the default settings sadly the
labels what looks like a label here is
not linked to the input field
so screen readers will struggle here so
have a look at your own forms and see
what happens with the wave tool
okay the last question
is the color contrast on your pages
sufficient obviously you need to answer
yes
what we want to avoid is people not
being able to read the text because it's
light
a dark grey on a light bay gray
background or something like that
there are rules about what the color
contrast needs to be
to test it you can use this tool and
i'll put the link a bit later on so you
can download it it's for windows
machines
and macs as well and you can use these
color picker elements here
and actually use this and it will tell
you immediately
whether it passes or fails the wookag
2.1 guidelines okay and quite a lot of
the blue these blue on the white
backgrounds
on this particular website failed
there's a site i looked at a couple of
years ago
okay here's another one you've seen this
bit a bit before
okay these text links here are green the
problem is this green
has not insufficient color contrast
against the white
and so it will show up and i hear i'm
using the axe browser extension
this is another useful accessibility
tool the link will be provided very
shortly
and the great thing about acts is it
groups all the
errors together so here i've got 53
elements on this page that have
insufficient color contrast
and it's literally all these all these
green links
okay and you can highlight them as well
on the page so you can see exactly what
it's talking about
it gives you some ideas about how to fix
it i can actually scroll through all
53 of those if i want to okay
there we go so
there are 15 questions hopefully fairly
straightforward to look at
using the tools that i've mentioned okay
you've got browser tools in there like
as are you just tabbing around a page
i've got the color contrast analyzer
this is not a browser extension
but it's as available for windows
machines and
max paciello group american company
accessibility company
then the wave testing tool is made by
webaim that's another
accessibility company it's available for
chrome and firefox
and then axe is made by dq and that's
available for chrome firefox and edge
and these tools i use them all the time
when i'm reviewing websites for
accessibility
i've also written some stuff about
accessibility myself
um here are
yeah look i wrote i was amazed i
actually wrote this or published this
blog post
10 years ago now but still i'm finding
websites that don't have
alternate text set correctly so if
you're not sure go and have a look at
this blog post
and it gives you some ideas of how to do
it properly in each of many situations
okay if you're at all wondering about
how to markup forms for accessibility
i've got a series of blog posts about
that as well
you can find them here and then as a
technique that i described i didn't
invent it by any means but i describe
how to do it here
text for screen readers only so it's
some text you can put some extra
information text there for screen reader
users
but it's not visible for sighted users
so it's a bit about that too
okay things i didn't cover and so i just
didn't have time to cover
in here like other things as well so you
know there are all kind
accessibility all kind of tests around
all of these things
but you know the ones i've showed are
probably the most important
and there we go that's the end of my
presentation
um i hope you found it interesting and
informative wonderful
graham thank you so much uh we are gonna
go ahead and go through some questions
excellent the first one that i'm seeing
here asks
is image captioning also a part of
accessibility
image captioning okay um so
uh that's an interesting one because yes
in wordpress sites you can set the
alternate text for an image when you add
it to a page
or a post and you can set a caption too
now in newer wordpress themes
uh it it what it does under under the
bonnets and i'm not sure everyone's
gonna be a is a developer on this
particular
call so um i am gonna get a bit
technical here
it actually puts the image and the
caption in a figure
and marks up the caption with a fig
caption
okay which is a i think it's a
relatively new perhaps an html5
construct um some screen readers do
actually um now link these two things
together but i wrote a blog post about
this
a couple of years ago and it's not
consistent it's not consistently
implemented
in screen readers so at the moment
that's why i recommended it when you're
adding
an image into a blog post or a page
it's even if you're setting the caption
it's a good idea to set
still set the alternate text as well
because
some screen readers will not link the
two together
got it wonderful next question
you've been working in the business for
over 20 years what has been the most
important advance in
web or wordpress accessibility during
that time
okay well it i've it's interesting
uh html5 actually which
started to appear i mean i think that
it's published the specification was
published 12 years ago or so
like that um over the last few years
more recently
um support for html5 elements
has been getting better all the time and
i mentioned when i was talking about
landmarks
that the html5 sectioning element
sectioning
elements like main nav header
footer etc they have
really helped because now they can
define regions within pages
for screen reader users unfortunately
some of the other great things that
html5 has introduced
like for example input type equals date
which gives you a fully or in theory
gives you a fully accessible
um date entry for
field for your forms
it works in some browsers and it works
in some screen readers
but it's not at all supported by
ie 11 internet explorer 11 which perhaps
may wouldn't surprise you
but even safari
on macs don't doesn't support input thai
people's date and has been an
outstanding bug about that
for many many years i think apple need
to get their backsides in gear
and actually support start sporting that
because let's face it
i didn't mention date pickers during the
presentation
but if you're providing a date picker
for somebody to use
it can be a hell of an experience if
it's not an accessible one
especially if you force people to use a
date picker that's not a good idea at
all so i think overall to summarize
html5 elements have started to make a
real difference now
and as support for these elements in
browsers and screen readers
increases then it's you know because
you know who wouldn't want to use them
because you get a lot of stuff for free
whenever
you use native html elements you get all
the accessibility for free there
so let's start using them once they're
well supported beautiful great answer
next question is which colors are best
to use an accessible design
i feel like that might have a
complicated answer well
yeah i'll try and keep it keep it short
um okay
so that's an interesting one and
talking about color contrast is as i did
earlier um
obviously the most color contrast could
be provided by
having black text on a white background
but i would caution against that because
whilst that's the maximum color contrast
you could ever have
um this is not good for some dyslexics
some people who are dyslexic
will find that that's just too much
color contrast it's too
in your face um which is on a colloquial
term but i hopefully everyone knows what
i mean by that
so i think don't yeah avoid
maybe black on white um or white or
black
these are quite good but maybe high
contrast you know schemes are good for
some people
um just share i mean most people who
most organizations i work with
they already got a brand palette already
and a lot of organizations have
color colors in their brand palette that
will actually provide
um combinations that provide enough
color contrast without being too much
some organizations that's not true and
then it can be a real problem with them
so
i think just make sure that you get
enough color contrast there and using
the tool that i mentioned earlier
uh either axe or the color contrast
analyzer
will help you there try and avoid like
blacks and white black and white it's a
bit too much for some people
so it sounds like the the summary of
that is it's maybe less about the color
themselves but the relationship between
the color like how
the colors contrast with each other
wonderful that's it um
so the next question do you have a go-to
or recommended theme that is ally
friendly as a starting point
uh that's a good question um when i've
been when i've built
worse wordpress websites for
organizations
over the last 10 years i've been doing
that literally
i have always started from scratch and
built my own i've got my own
like effectively starter theme which i
tend to just tweak i think many
developers work that way anyway
but that said um a lot of the
um the default wordpress themes
are pretty good like the 20x 2020 2019
and everything like that
i believe their features are quite good
um i don't have a name of any other
themes
that i can recommend things to look out
for though
within within the theme review process
there
is a a tag that people can apply for
theme developers can apply for called
accessibility ready
uh it was something that was introduced
by the accessibility team and joe did a
lot of work on this
over the years and uh
it's you know if you if you want an
accessible theme go and have a look you
can select the themes when you're doing
a review of the themes on wordpress.org
you can select themes that have the tag
accessibility
ready and these ones probably are better
than
many others wonderful
all righty next question it helps a lot
when a site uses a different color
for visited links but how do you make
that accessible oh so it helps out when
a site uses a different color
than the default shade of purple for
visited links but how do you make that
accessible
okay well that's a an interesting one i
mean when you're choosing colors for
your links on your buttons and what have
you i mean
you've got i mean in theory and like
almost an infinite choice of what you
can use but
it is important for some people to know
which links are visited i wouldn't have
said it was one of the highest
importance
accessibility issues if uh if i'm using
a screen reader i use nvda for a lot of
my accessibility testing and um
it will tell me uh which links are
visited and which
i've already visited it would just say
so and so link visited
okay so as a screen reader user i know
that i've already been there
um yeah you can use a different color
um people would have to learn the
default colors
like for our blue for links that you
haven't visited yet and
purple for links that you have visited
now obviously people want to
you know use something that's in their
brand palette but i wouldn't get too
hung up about
um you know indicating visited links too
much really
um yeah just choose a color that if you
want to if you want to indicate them you
choose a separate color from the other
one but
you know don't worry too much about that
awesome
uh the next question graham do you have
any tips for
an upcoming new wordpress developer
okay yeah um good question
uh i was in that role at one point and
uh
you know maybe i need to be learning it
all again now there's guten playing
around
but uh yeah um
in the theme review guidelines there's a
lot of
know a lot of code standards now coding
standards now
um that includes a section on how to
build
an accessible theme it's got like it's
uh
i didn't really have much of a hand in
crafting this at all but i know
that other members of the accessible
team have
had a lot to do with it and it's worth
having a look because it's got some real
really good tips in there and talks
about some of the issues that i covered
in my presentation
and explains from a developer's
perspective
more about how to actually do that in
the themes that you're building so i
recommend
that you start with the you know the
wordpress theme
coding guidelines and then the
accessibility standards as well
how theme developers would get you know
work towards getting that accessibility
ready tag
wonderful all right next one this one is
a little bit long
it seems so many people knowingly ignore
accessibility altogether
if you could wave a magic wand and
immediately answer
just one question mentioned during your
talk and never need to address it ever
again
what would you choose to make the
biggest positive impact
and why keyboard focus interaction
tab order links etc okay i'm gonna have
to say
it's one of the keyboard ones here and
whether it's yeah visible focus
is it's just vital for
you know the actual people think of
blind people
using the web yeah that's obviously
going to be a bit difficult and then yes
they can use a screen reader
okay but actually
the the population of people who
are sighted but who have to use a
keyboard or who choose to use a keyboard
i actually got into it when these things
like you know here's my mouse
these things didn't exist right i was
all black and green screens and keyboard
keystrokes and whatever like that
i'm still a bit of a power keyboard user
myself so i would say
visible focus you know is is vital
for um you know for and making sure that
people can get to everywhere
everything anything that's a button or a
link um sometimes
things pretend to be a button and and
they receive it they can you can click
on them
but you can't actually tab to them right
so keyboard
keep visible keyboard focus and keeping
focus in the right place
that's that's going to be the one really
wonderful all right we've got about
three minutes left so we've got time for
a couple more
um i think this one's my favorite so far
is there a way to do an accessible image
carousel or slideshow
um yeah okay um
a lot of companies that i've been
working with and there's some big
organizations now are actually moving
away from using carousels
um because a lot of people you know
yeah there are people who think they're
a good idea but there's a lot of people
who don't think they're a good idea
the short answer is it's tricky but it
is possible
um i mentioned the workout guidelines
if you look on the web accessibility
initiative
website it's got some
some useful pages that show accessible
examples of things like you know um
carousels drop down navigation
um they've also got uh accordions tab
panels and what have you
and you track those down uh i i don't
know if i
if i put the i haven't got the link
handy at the moment but maybe
i can stick it in later on some way um
they've got an example carousel and it's
fairly good
from an accessibility perspective it can
be used by keyboard users
touch screen users screen reader users
and also let's not forget people who use
voice recognition software like dragon
naturally speaking as well
um it's important that you i didn't
mainly mention that at all either
but it's important that everything that
you build can be actioned by
people who use those tools so you know
yeah there is
there are accessible patterns out there
um
and it's useful to follow those
all right we have one minute left so we
can squeeze one more in i think all
right i'll make it a quickie
wonderful last question would you like
to see accessibility standards for
wordpress plugins and if so
how do you think we could apply them
okay good question
short answer is yes i would that whilst
there are guidance for theme
builders on accessibility there is no
guidance at all for plug-in builders at
all and plug-ins as we've seen with the
lightbox in my presentation
and also contact forms can completely
mess up the accessibility of your
website
so it's like the wild west out there
fantastic wonderful graham thank you so
much that's right on our time
uh and thank you all cheers everyone
take care bye bye bye and thank you all
everyone watching for attending so how
do i know if my wordpress website is
accessible with graham and me